Chapter 6: Service invocation (#2)
amolenk/docs: docs/architecture/dapr-for-net-developers/serviceinvocation.md

---
title: The Service Invocation building block
description: A description of the Service Invocation building block and how to apply it
author: amolenk
ms.date: 09/26/2020
---

# The Service Invocation building block

> Many services need to communicate with each other in a distributed system. The Service Invocation building block enables you to quickly set up communication between services using either gRPC or HTTP protocols while providing additional benefits.

Reviewer: Services often need to communicate with one other services across a distributed system. The Dapr Service Invocation building block enables you to quickly establish communication between services using either gRPC or HTTP protocols, while providing additional benefits.

## What it solves

> Making calls between services in a distributed application may sound easy, but there are some challenges involved. In a distributed application, how do you even know where the other services are? Once you've got the address, how do you call that service securely? And what about if that call fails? How do you handle retries to transient errors? Lastly, since distributed applications can consist of many different services, it is also necessary to get insights into the application and the service call graphs to diagnose issues that may pop up in production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Making calls between services in a distributed application may sound easy, but there are some challenges involved. In a distributed application, how do you even know where the other services are? Once you've got the address, how do you call that service securely? And what about if that call fails? How do you handle retries when transient errors occur? Lastly, since distributed applications can consist of many different services, it is also necessary to get insights into the application and the service call graphs to diagnose issues that may pop up in production.
```

The Dapr Service Invocation building block helps you solve these challenges by using a Dapr sidecar as a reverse proxy for your service.

## How it works

> Let's start with an example. There are two services, service A and service B, and service A needs to call the `catalog/items` API on service B. Instead of making a direct call from service A to service B, service A uses the invoke API of its Dapr sidecar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's start with an example. There are two services, service A and service B, and service A needs to call the `catalog/items` API on service B. Instead of making a direct call from service A to service B, service A calls the invoke API of its Dapr sidecar.
```

![How it works](./media/service-invocation/howitworks.png)

The sidecar takes care of the rest. It first uses the pluggable service discovery mechanism to resolve the address of service B. Standalone hosting uses mDNS to achieve this. When running in Kubernetes, Dapr uses the Kubernetes DNS service to determine the address.

After the sidecar has resolved the address, it forwards the request to the service B sidecar. The service B sidecar then makes the actual `catalog/items` request on the service B API. The response returned by service B will flow back through the sidecars to service A.

> Because the calls flow through sidecars, Dapr can inject some handy functionality:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because the calls flow through sidecars, Dapr can inject some useful behaviors:
```

- automatic retries in case of failures
- traffic encryption using automatic mutual TLS
- control what operations clients can perform using access control policies
- gather traces and metrics for all calls between services to provide insights and diagnostics

> To invoke a service using Dapr, use the `invoke` API on the Dapr sidecar:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To invoke a service using Dapr over HTTP, call the `invoke` API on the Dapr sidecar:
```

```
http://localhost:<daprPort>/v1.0/invoke/<applicationid>/method/<methodname>
```

In the following example, we use *curl* to call the `catalog/items` 'GET' endpoint of `serviceb`:

```
curl http://localhost:3500/v1.0/invoke/serviceb/method/catalog/items
```

In the next section, we'll use the native .NET SDK to make service invocation calls.

### Using the .NET SDK

> The Dapr .NET SDK provides .NET developers with a native way to interact with Dapr. For most interaction with Dapr instances, you can use the `DaprClient` class.

Reviewer 2: This intro will basically be part of every building block chapter. So we should describe this in a more general description of the .NET SDK (chapter 2 / 3).

``` csharp
var result = await daprClient.InvokeMethodAsync<Order, SubmitOrderResult>(
    "orderservice", "order/submit", order);
```

The `order` object is serialized (the SDK uses `System.Text.JsonSerializer` internally) and sent as the request payload. The SDK takes care of the call to the sidecar and deserializes the method call response to a `SubmitOrderResult` object.

Using the .NET SDK, you can call services that provide either a gRPC or HTTP/REST API. When calling a service listening on HTTP, you can use the `HttpExtension` class to configure the HTTP call details. The `HttpExtension` class provides access to the following properties:

- Verb: the HTTP verb (e.g. `POST`, `GET`, `PUT`, `PATCH`, and `DELETE`). The default verb used is `POST`.
- ContentType: The content-type of the HTTP request, such as `application/json`.
- QueryString: A collection of query string parameters.
- Headers: A collection of HTTP request headers.

As an example, consider the following HTTP endpoint:
```
http://<serviceb-address>/catalog/items?pagesize=10
```

> Using the `HttpExtension` class, you can provide all the necessary settings for this call to the `DaprClient`:

Reviewer 2: Is "settings" the best description here? It is also content like headers.

```suggestion
Using the `HttpExtension` class, you can setup all the necessary parts of the HTTP request for this call to the `DaprClient`:
```

Author: Maybe "all the necessary HTTP details for this call"?

``` csharp
var result = await daprClient.InvokeMethodAsync<IEnumerable<CatalogItem>>(
    "serviceb",
    "catalog/items",
    new HTTPExtension
    {
        Verb = HTTPVerb.Get,
        QueryString = new Dictionary<string, string>
        {
            ["pagesize"] = "10"
        }
    });
``` 

## Reference case: eShopOnDapr

> The original eShopOnContainers implementation uses a mix of HTTP/REST and gRPC services. The use of gRPC is limited to the communication between aggregator services and back-end services:

Reviewer 2: I described everything in eShopOnContainers in past tense (as in "that's how it was before eShopOnDapr).
Present tense might be better though, because eShopOnDapr exists next to it. Let's discuss in next call and decide (I can also change this in my chapter).

3. An aggregator service handles more complex requests that involve various coordinated calls to back-end services.
4. The Web Shopping Aggregator service uses gRPC to call back-end services.

In the eShopOnDapr implementation, the services, as well as the API Gateway, have been *Daprized* by adding Dapr sidecar containers:

![gRPC and HTTP/REST calls in eShopOnContainers](./media/service-invocation/eshopondapr.png)

1. The front-end still uses HTTP/REST to call the API Gateway.
2. The Envoy API Gateway forwards requests to the `invoke` API of its sidecar to use Dapr service invocation to make calls to the HTTP/REST APIs of the aggregator and back-end services.
3. The Web Shopping Aggregator service uses the Dapr .NET SDK to call the HTTP/REST APIs of the back-end services. 

All calls between sidecars are gRPC calls. So even in the case where you're invoking an HTTP/REST API of a remote service, you still get gRPC performance benefits for the calls between the sidecars. Those calls matter the most for performance in a real-world scenario because sidecars often are located on different machines.

> > Note that the Service Invocation building block acts as a bridge between protocols. Calls to and from the sidecars use either gRPC or HTTP protocols. Therefore, services can communicate using HTTP to HTTP, HTTP to gRPC, gRPC to HTTP, or gRPC to gRPC. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Note that the Service Invocation building block acts as a bridge between protocols. Calls to and from the sidecars use either gRPC or HTTP protocols. Therefore, services can communicate using HTTP, gRPC or a combination of both. 
```

By using Dapr sidecars, eShopOnDapr now benefits from the features offered by the Service Invocation building block such as service discovery, automatic mTLS, and observability.

### Forward HTTP requests using Envoy and Dapr

In the original eShopOnContainers implementation, Envoy forwards incoming HTTP requests from the front-ends directly to the appropriate back-end service. In eShopOnDapr, a Dapr sidecar is added to the Envoy proxy to get Dapr Service Invocation benefits such as mTLS and observability.

> We first added a `dapr` cluster to the Envoy configuration to make it possible for Envoy to forward HTTP requests to a Dapr sidecar container. The cluster configuration contains a host that points to the HTTP listening port of the Dapr sidecar:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We first added a `dapr` cluster to the Envoy configuration to make it possible for Envoy to forward HTTP requests to a Dapr sidecar container. The cluster configuration contains a host that points to the HTTP port the Dapr sidecar is listening on:
```

Author: I think your suggestion is the way I initially wrote it before running it through Grammarly ;-)

Author: While your suggestion is move passive, I think I agree that it reads a bit better.

  type: strict_dns
  hosts:
  - socket_address:
    address: 127.0.0.1
    port_value: 3500
```

We then updated the Envoy routes configuration to rewrite incoming requests as calls to the Dapr sidecar:

``` yaml
- name: "c-short"
  match:
    prefix: "/c/"
  route:
    auto_host_rewrite: true
    prefix_rewrite: "/v1.0/invoke/catalog-api/method/"
    cluster: dapr
```

For example, consider the scenario where the front-end wants to retrieve a list of catalog items. The Catalog API provides an endpoint for getting the catalog items:

``` csharp
[Route("api/v1/[controller]")]
[ApiController]
public class CatalogController : ControllerBase
{
    ...

    [HttpGet]
    [Route("items")]
    public async Task<IActionResult> ItemsAsync(
        [FromQuery]int pageSize = 10,
        [FromQuery]int pageIndex = 0)
    {
        ...
    }
```

First, the front-end makes a direct HTTP call to the Envoy API gateway. This behavior hasn't changed in eShopOnDapr compared to eShopOnContainers.

```
GET http://<api-gateway>/c/api/v1/catalog/items?pageSize=20
```

Envoy matches the route, rewrites the HTTP request, and forwards it to the `invoke` API of its Dapr sidecar:

```

> GET http://127.0.0.1:3500/v1.0/invoke/catalog-api/method/api/v1/catalog/items?pageSize=20

Reviewer 2: Why 127.0.0.1 in stead of `localhost`?

Author: Nano-optimizations! We don't want to wait 'for ages' for naming resolution ;-)
I'll change it in the text to make sure the readers understand what's going on.

```

The sidecar takes care of service discovery and sends the request to the Catalog API sidecar. Finally, the Catalog API sidecar will call the Catalog API to get the catalog items and return the response:

```

> GET http://127.0.0.1/api/v1/catalog/items?pageSize=20

Reviewer 2: Why 127.0.0.1 in stead of `localhost`?

Author: Ditto, will change to localhost

                    ["ids"] = string.Join(",", ids),
                },
                Verb = HTTPVerb.Get 
            });
    }

    ...
}
```

Note how we use the `HTTPExtension` object to pass the query string and HTTP verb details to the Catalog API.

The other call made by the Web Shopping Aggregator service is to the Basket API, which only allows authorized requests. We pass the access token along in an *Authorization* request header to ensure the call succeeds:

``` csharp
public class BasketService : IBasketService
{
    private const string DaprAppId = "basket-api";

    ...

    public Task UpdateAsync(BasketData currentBasket, string accessToken)
    {
        return _daprClient.InvokeMethodAsync(
            DaprAppId,
            "api/v1/basket",
            currentBasket,
            new HTTPExtension
            {
                Headers = new Dictionary<string, string>
                {
                    [HeaderNames.Authorization] = accessToken
                }
            });
    }

    ...
}
```

Note that we don't need to explicitly specify the HTTP verb for this POST call because `POST` is the default value of `HTTPExtension.Verb`.

## Summary

> In this chapter, we introduced the Service Invocation building block. We showed how to invoke remote methods by making direct HTTP calls to the Dapr sidecar and using the Dapr .NET SDK. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this chapter, we introduced the Service Invocation building block. We showed how to invoke remote methods both by making direct HTTP calls to the Dapr sidecar as well as by using the Dapr .NET SDK. 
```

Author: Again, my original text was close to your suggestion. Grammarly suggested that 'as well as by' could be replaced by 'and', which I think is a bit more succint. There's a middle ground that Grammarly also seems to like:
```
In this chapter, we introduced the Service Invocation building block. We showed how to invoke remote methods both by making direct HTTP calls to the Dapr sidecar and using the Dapr .NET SDK. 
```
